# Random numbers

* Numerical simulations play a fundamental role when solving real-world problems. For instance, computer simulation is used to predict the weather, aircraft design, create special effects for movies, among others.
* Many simulations require events to occur with a certain likelihood. These sorts of simulations are called Monte Carlo simulations because the results depend on "_chance_". 
* A similar approach is used to generate pseudorandom numbers.
* A **pseudorandom number generator** works by starting with a _seed_ value. This value is given to a function to output a pseudorandom number. The next time a random number is required, the current value is fed back into the function to produce a new one.
* This sequence of numbers appears to be random, but if you start the process over again with the same seed number, you will get the same sequence of pseudorandom numbers.
* Python provides a library module that contains a number of functions for working with pseudorandom numbers.
* These functions derive an initial seed value from the computer's date and time when the module is loaded, so each time a program is run a different sequence of random numbers is produced.
* The main functions are **randrange** and **random**.

## The _randrange_ function

* The randrange function is used to select a pseudorandom int from a given range. The syntax is similar to that of the function **range**.

```python
import random
numbers = random.randrange(1, 6)
numbers2 = random.randrange(5, 105, 10)
```

* The first example return a number from 1 to 5 (i.e., [1,2,3,4,5]), whereas the second one returns a multiple of 5 between 5 and 100 inclusive.
* Ranges go up to, but do not include, the stopping value.
* Each call to _randrange_ generates a new pseudorandom int.

```python
import random
for _ in range(10):
    print(random.randrange(1, 6))
```

* The value 5 comes up over half the time, demonstrating the probabilistic nature of pseudorandom numbers.
* Over time, this function will produce a uniform distribution, which means that all values will appear an approximately equal number of times.

There is also the function _randint_(a, b). It returns a number in a range starting at _a_ up to and including _b_.

## The _random_ function

* The random function is used to generate pseudorandom floating point values
* It takes no parameters and returns values uniformly distributed between 0 and 1 (including 0 but not 1).

```python
from random import random

for _ in range(10):
    print(random())
```

## The _choice_ function

Python can also choose randomly from a list of alternatives

```python
from random import choice

cheeses = ["Cheddar", "Edam", "Gouda"]
cheese = choice(cheeses)
```

It returns an element of the list.

It also accepts a string as an argument.

```python
from random import choice

answer = choice("ABCD")
print(answer)
```

Returns a random letter from the string. One can also get the same result using the _randrange_ function.

```python
from random import randrange

answer = "ABCD"[randrange(4)]
print(answer)
```

## Seeding and reproducibility

* As mentioned, the numbers generated by random number generations in computers are pseudorandom. They are determined by an initial value called a **seed**.
* Using the same seed will produce the same sequence of numbers. It is useful when you need reproducibility, especially in debugging or scientific experiments.

```python
import random

random.seed(42)  
print(random.random())
```

It will produce the same _"random"_ value every time with this seed. 

The **random** module is useful for general-purpose random number generations, but it is unsuitable for cryptographic purposes. For those, Python has a separate module called _secrets_.
