# Lists, Tuples, and Dictionaries

## Lists

A list is an ordered set of elements, where each element is identified by an index. Lists are similar to strings, which are ordered sets of characters. The elements of a list can have any type.

### Creating a list

There are multiples way to create a list. The simplest one is to enclose the elements in square brackets ([ and ])

```python
names = ["Alice", "Sophie", "Mary", "Eve"]
ages = [20, 22, 54, 34]
```

The first example is a list of four string values, where the second one is a list of four integers. 

Python provides a simple way to create a list of consecutive integers.

```python
numbers = list(range(0, 10))
print(numbers)
```

The **range** function takes two arguments and returns an object that produces a sequence of integers from the start to the stop, **including the start but not the stop**.

If there is a third argument, it determines the **step size**. A step size defines the increment or decrement between successive values

```python
numbers = list(range(0, 100, 2))
print(numbers)
```

This example creates a list of integer starting from zero until 99 with a step size of two
\[[0, 2, 4, 6, 8, \ldots, 98]\]

With calling the function _range_ with a single argument, it creates a list starting at 0

```python
numbers = list(range(10))
print(numbers)
```

The output will be \([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]\)

One can also create an empty list

```python
empty = []
```

### Accessing individual elements

One can access an element of a list through the bracket operator ([]). The expression inside the brackets specifies the index. **Remember that the indices start at 0**.

```python
cheeses = ["Cheddar", "Edam", "Gouda"]
print(cheeses[1])
cheeses[2] = "Feta"
print(cheeses)
```

Any integer expression can be used as an index. Example

```python
print(cheeses[2-1])
```

If you try to use a non-integer expression, you will get a _TypeError_.

```python
numbers[1.0]
```

_TypeError: list indices must be integers or slices, not float_

We get an **IndexError**, when trying to read or write an element that does not exist

```python
print(numbers[10])
numbers[10] = 42
```

IndexError: list index out of range

If an index has a negative value, it counts backward from the end of the list

```python
print(numbers[-1])
```

numbers[-1] is the last element of the list, numbers[-2] is the second to last, \(\ldots\)

### Traversing a list

```python
for cheese in cheeses:
    print(cheese)
```

It almost reads like English: "for every cheese in (the list of) _cheeses_, print (the name of the) cheese.

One can also use the **enumerate** function to get the index and the element when traversing a list

```python
for i, cheese in enumerate(cheeses):
    print(i, cheese)
```

In this case, the variable \(i\) has the value of each element represented by the variable _cheese_

### List operations

The **+** operator concatenates two lists

```python
a = list(range(1, 9, 2))
b = list(range(9, 15, 2))
c = a + b
print(c)
```

Similarly, the **\*** operator repeats a list a given number of times

```python
a = [42] * 3
print(a)
b = [42, 5] * 2
print(b)
```

The first example repeats the list **[42]** three times. The second one repeats the list [42, 5] two times

We can also use the method **extend**

```python
b.extend([100, 300])
cheeses.extend(["Feta", "Mozzarella", "Burrata"])
```

We can also use the method **append** to add a new element to a list

```python
cheeses.append("Orda")
print(cheeses)
```

### Lists are mutable

* Strings are **immutable** as one cannot change the contents of a string without creating a new one
* Any tentative to change the value of a string lead to a **TypeError*.
* Example

```python
fruit = "Banana"
fruit[0] = "b"
```

* In this example, we tried to change the first letter of a string to be lowercase, but we got the error: _TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment_.
* For this, we need to call the method lower and assign its results to the variable fruit. In other words, we need to create a new string.

```python
fruit = fruit.lower()
print(fruit)
```

* Lists are **mutable** because one can **change the order** of items in a list or **assign** a new value to an element in a list.

```python
numbers = [42, 69, 87, 88, 95]
print(numbers) # Output: [42, 69, 87, 88, 95]
numbers[3] = 91 
print(numbers) # Output: [42, 69, 87, 91, 95]
```

### Removing elements of a list

* There are several ways to delete elements from a list
* If index of the element to remove is known, one can use the method **pop**

```python
numbers = [1, 5, 8]
number = numbers.pop(1)

print(numbers) #Output: [1, 8]
print(number)  #Output: 5
```

* The method **pop** modifies the list and returns the element that was removed. In other words, the method **pop** removes an element of a given position and returns its value. If the list is empty or the index is out of range, it raises an _IndexError_.
* If we do not provide an index, it deletes and returns the **last** element

* The example, we can read as: _remove the element at the first position_.
* If we do not need the removed value, we can use the operator **del**. 

```python
numbers = [1, 5, 8]
del numbers[1]
print(numbers) #Output: [1, 8]
```

* We can use the operator **del** with a slice index to remove more than one element

```python
numbers = [1, 5, 8]
del numbers[0:2]
print(numbers) # [8]
```

* If we know the element to remove, but not the index, we can use the method **remove**

```python
numbers = [1, 5, 8]
numbers.remove(5)
print(numbers) #Output: [1, 8]
```

### List comprehensions

* Frequently, we need to transform a list into another one, by choosing only certain elements
* A way to do this in Python is through list comprehensions

```python
even_numbers = [x for x in range(10) if x % 2 == 0]
squares = [x * x for x in range(10)]
even_squares = [x * x for x in even_numbers]
```

* A list comprehensions can include multiple loops

```python
pairs = [(x, y)\
         for x in range(10)\
         for y in range(10)]\
```

## Built-in functions and lists

* There are a number of built-in functions that take a list as parameters
* Examples include max, min, sum, len, among others

```python
numbers = [8, 100, 45, 90, -1]

print("Length:", len(numbers)) #Output: Length: 5
print("Min:",    min(numbers)) #Output: Min: -1
print("Max:",    max(numbers)) #Output: Max: 100
print("Sum:",    sum(numbers)) #Output: Sum: 242
print("Mean:",   sum(numbers) / len(numbers)) #Output: Mean: 48.4
```

### Lists and strings

* One can break a string into its parts through the method **split**
* For instance, if a string represents a text, one can see break into its words
* One can access a particular word or loop through all the words

```python
names = "Alice, Sophie, Bob, Eve"
students = names.split(",")
print(students)
```

* One might also want to join the elements of a list to represent as a single string
* This can be done through the method **join** of a string

```python
students =  ["Alice", "Sophie", "Bob", "Eve"]
print(";".join(students))
```

* Output the name of the students separated by a semicolon.

```python
numbers = list(range(10))
print(",".join(str(i) for i in numbers))
```

### Objects and values

When one assigns a variable to another, both variables will refer to the same object

```python
a = [1, 8, 10]
b = a
```

In this case, we case a list has two different names **a** and **b**. Changes made with one will affect the other. This behavior is called **aliasing**.

```python
b[0] = 7
print(a)
# [7, 8, 10]
```

Although this behavior can be useful, it is sometimes unexpected or undesirable. In general, it is safer to avoid aliasing when you are working with _mutable objects_.

### Cloning lists

If you want to modify a list and also keep a copy of the original one, you need to work on a copy the list. This process is sometimes called **cloning**.

The easiest way to clone a list is to use the **slice operator**.

```python
a = [1, 8, 10]
b = a[:]
print(b)
```

Taking any slice of the list **a** creates a new list. In this case, the slice happens to consist the whole list. Now, you can change the list **b** without affecting the list **a**.

```python
b[0] = 7
print(a)
# [1, 8, 10]
```

### List as parameters

Passing a list as an argument of a function actually passes a **reference** to the list and not a copy of it. For example, the function head takes a list as a parameter and returns the first element:

```python
def head(list):
    return list[0]
```

```python
numbers = [1, 8, 10]
head(numbers)
```

In this case, the parameter _list_ and the variable _numbers_ refer to the same object.

If a function modifies a list parameter, the caller sees the change. For example, the function **delete_head** removes the first element from a given list.

```python
def delete_head(list):
    del list[0]
```

```python
numbers = [1, 8, 10]
delete_head(numbers)
print(numbers)
# [8, 10]
```

In the same context, if a function returns a list, it returns a reference to the list.

#### Nested lists

The element of a list may be another list

```python
values = [names, ages]
```

A list with another list is said to be **nested**. Nested lists are often used to represent matrices. For example the matrix:

\[
    \begin{bmatrix}
      1 & 2 & 3\\
      4 & 5 & 6\\
      7 & 8 & 9\\
    \end{bmatrix}
\]

might be represented as:

```python
matrix = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]
```

* _matrix_ is a list with three elements, where each element is a **row** of the matrix. One can select an entire row from the matrix in the usual way

```python
print(matrix[1])
```

The output is the entire first row [4, 5, 6].

We can also extract a single element from the matrix using the double-index format

```python
print(matrix[1][1])
```

* The first index selects the row, and the second one selects the column. There are other type of matrix representation such as list of columns instead of a list of rows.

## Tuples

* Tuples are another kind of sequence that works much like a list
* Tuples have elements which are indexed starting at 0
* Pretty much anything we can do to a list that doesn't change its state, we can do to a tuple
* We can specify a tuple by using parentheses or nothing instead of square brackets
  
```python
cheeses = ('Cheddar', 'Mozzarella', 'Burrata')
students = ('Alice', 'Elsa', 'Mary', 'Eve')
```

* Tuples are a convenient way to return multiple values from a function
* Tuple contents are ordered (like an array).

```python
s = ('GOOG', 100, 490.1)
name = s[0]                 # 'GOOG'
shares = s[1]               # 100
price = s[2]                # 490.1
```

* Unlike a list, once we created a tuple, we cannot alter its contents

```python
s[1] = 75
```

One will get the error "**TypeError: object does not support item assignment**"

### Tuples are more memory efficient

* Since Python does not have to build tuple structures to be modifiable, they are simpler and more efficient in terms of memory use and performance than lists
  * Thus, in our program when we are making ``temporary variables'', we prefer tuples over lists

### Tuples are comparable

* The comparison operators work with tuples and other sequences (\eg{} lists)
* If the first item is equal, Python goes on to the next element, and so on, until it finds elements that differ

```python
numbers = (1, 5, 8)
print (numbers < (6, 10, 15))
```

You can, however, make a new tuple based on a current tuple.

```python
s = (s[0], 75, s[2])
```

### Tuple Unpacking

To use the tuple elsewhere, you can unpack its parts into variables.

```python
name, shares, price = s
print('Cost', shares * price)
```

The number of variables on the left must match the tuple structure.

```python
name, shares = s     # ERROR
Traceback (most recent call last):
...
ValueError: too many values to unpack
```

## Dictionaries

* A dictionary is another fundamental data structure in Python
* It stores information in key-value pairs
* It associates values with keys
* It enables one to quickly retrieve the value corresponding to a given key
* Dictionaries are like lists except that they use keys instead of numbers to look up values
* You can define them explicitly using `key:value` pairs and curly braces.

```python
mountains = {'Mount Everest': 8848, 'K2': 8611, 'Kangchenjunga': 8586}
```

### Adding new key-value pairs

To add a new key-value pair, you give the dictionary a name followed by the new key in square brackets, and set that equal to the new value.

```python
mountains = dict()
mountains['Mount Everest'] = 8848
mountains['K2'] = 8611
mountains['Kangchenjunga'] = 8586
```

* Dictionaries do not store their information in any particular order, so you may not get your information back in the same order you entered it.

We can get individual items out of the dictionary by giving the dictionary’s name, followed by the key in square brackets:

```python
print(mountains['Mount Everest'])
```

Dictionaries have their own for loop syntax, since there are two kinds of information in dictionaries: the key and the value. 

The general syntax is:

```python
for key, value in dictionary_name.items():
    print(key, value)
```

For example,

```python
for mountain, altitude in mountains.items():
    print(mountain, altitude)
```

* The method `items` returns a list of tuples, where each tuple is a key-value pair.

* If you want, you can also get a list of keys of a dictionary through its method `keys`

```python
names = mountains.keys()
```

* Similarly, you can also get a list of values through the method `values`

```python
altitudes = mountains.values()
```

* If you attempt to access an entry that is not in the dictionary, Python will return an error.

```python
mountains['Lhotse']
```

Python will return the following error:

```sh
Traceback (most recent call last):
KeyError: 'Lhotse'
```

To check if an entry is in the dictionary use the `.get(key)` function, which returns the value or `None` if the key is not in the dictionary.

```python
print(mountains.get('Lhotse'))
```

### Modifying values in a dictionary

* Modifying a value in a dictionary is similar to modifying an element in a list.
* You give the name of the dictionary and then the `key` in square brackets, and set that equal to the new value.

```python
mountains['Lhotse'] = 8516
```

### Removing key-value pairs

* You can remove a key-value pairs from a dictionary using the same `del` command you learned to use with lists.
* In this case, you give the `del` command, followed by the name of the dictionary, with the key that you want to delete. This removes the key and the value as a pair.

```python
del mountains['Lhotse']
```
